.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.TH askfilter 1 "2003" GNU "Active Spam Killer Manual"
.SH NAME
askfilter \- Active Spam Killer

.SH SYNOPSIS
askfilter [\fB--procmail\fR] [\fB--logfile\fR=\fIlogfile\fR] [\fB--loglevel\fR=\fIloglevel\fR]
[\fB--home\fR=\fIhomedir\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Active Spam Killer (ASK) is a challenge-authentication anti-spam tool that
attempts to validate unknown senders before allowing delivery of their
message. Validation occurs by means of a challenge reply sent to senders
who are not yet known to the system. Messages are kept in a queue pending
confirmation until the sender replies to the challenge. Further messages
coming from confirmed senders are delivered immediately.

ASK expects incoming mails on the standard input and performs delivery
directly to the user's mailbox, as specified in the \fI~.askrc\fR
configuration file. If using the \fB--procmail\fR switch, ASK works as a
\fIprocmail\fR(1) filter, delivering messages to stdout and setting the
appropriate return code for procmail.

New users should always execute the \fIasksetup\fR(1) bootstrap program to
create the initial \fI~/.ask\fR directory and a template \fI.askrc\fR file.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP --procmail
In this mode, normal messages will be delivered to stdout and the
corresponding exit codes will be used to mark delivery or not.  Use this
switch when invoking ASK from \fIprocmail\fR(1)

.IP --logfile=filename
Specifies the file to be used for logging.

.IP --loglevel=loglevel
Specifies the desired logging level. Defaults to 0 (no logging).

.IP --home=homedir
Use 
.I homedir
as the user's home directory. This is needed with some MTAs that do not set the HOME
environment variable. It is also useful to run several, isolated ASK
configurations with a unique user account.

.SH FILES
.I ~/.askrc
.RS
Main configuration file.
.RE
.I ~/.ask
.RS
This directory contains the queued files, temporary files and lists.
.RE
.SH DOCUMENTATION

The program's home page and the complete documentation can be found at
\fIhttp://www.paganini.net/ask\fR

.SH BUGS
Bugs? Where? :)
.SH AUTHOR
Marco Paganini <paganini@paganini.net>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR asksenders (1),
.BR asksetup (1),
.BR procmail (1)
